so the next topic in tech similarity is
called dimensionality reduction the
motivation behind dimensionality
reduction is that a document is often
not about many different topics but just
a relatively small number of topics
certain is smaller than the number of
words that appear in it so if we can
somehow collapse some of the words into
semantic categories we may be able to
find better similarity measures for
example if we can collapse all the
documents about patients doctors and
hospitals into one place we may consider
them to be semantically similar even
though they contain different words in
that set so the simpler vector
approaches to similar idea that we
looked at so far have a few problems in
many cases there's a Bollywood polysemy
that's when the similarity the actual
similarity between the words is smaller
than what the cosine similarity would
make belief that include words with
multiple senses such as bar Bank Jaguar
or heart the opposite point is due to
synonymy that's when the actual
similarity between the words is larger
than what the cosine similarity would
make believe so the word like building
is a synonym of edifice there are
different words therefore they're going
to appear in different contexts but even
though they're in different contexts
they have the same meaning so we want
some how to model synonyms and in that
case overestimate their cosine
similarity the matrix between words and
sentences in general very sparse and it
needs to be processed through
dimensionality reduction so that we can
find some hidden semantic dimensions in
it so let's look at some examples from
the natural language processing
literature so the example on the Left
gives you a multiple choice question
from the TOEFL test the you're given a
word specifically leavitt and you asked
which word is most similar to it so the
choices are a imposed be believed C
requested D correlated and the answer is
that the most similar word to labid is
imposed so this is the kind of semantic
relationships
we want to discover in text and this is
where cement this is where latent
semantic analysis the technique that we
are going to introduce today is going to
help us the same technique is also used
to identify similar analogies so an
example from the SAT test is you're
given the pair Mason to stone and you
asked which of the following five
choices represents the most similar
relationship as the one between a Mason
and the stone so the answers are a
teacher to chalk be carpenter to would
see soldier to gun the photograph to
camera and ebook to word and the correct
answer here is carpentry to wood because
just like a Mason is a person who works
stone a carpenter is a person who works
wood all the other analogies are
different so it turns out that this
problem of analogy similarity can also
be resolved by dimensionality reduction
techniques and a lot of this work was
actually done by Peter tourney in his
papers from the last ten years
so let's now consider dimensionality
reduction in more detail so the purpose
of this method is to look for hidden
similarities in data it's based on
matrix decomposition and I'm going to
introduce it by giving an example from
some high school where people measured
the heights and the weights of the
students in the school and the
scatterplot on the Left shows you the
different students who were measured the
x-axis represents and let's say the
height and the y-axis represents the
weight now we can find a regression line
that explains this data the best it's
shown in the middle with a red line that
appears diagonally now it turns out that
there is a third variable in addition to
height and weights that can explain the
differences in height and weight between
the different students and that is
exactly what the regression line shows
you this line corresponds to the
dimension of age so it turns out that
the sample of students in that high
school was not students of the same age
it was students from across all
different classes and age groups so
obviously the students in there
grades were both lighter and shorter
than the students in the upper grades
but if we collapse each of those points
on the diagonal axis that represents the
regression line you will see that there
is actually a very nice trend you know
students who older are both taller and
heavier than younger students so in this
process we're not losing much
information it turns out that we can
replace height and weight with age and
gain most of the information that
appears in the data set on the left and
everything that is different between the
two examples tells us how a particular
student differs from the trend so a
person who is too tall for the age or
somebody who is too short for the age so
what we needed here was to reduce the
dimensionality of our data set from two
dimensions to one dimension so how is
this done in practice well let's go back
to a little bit of linear algebra we
need to remember how vectors and
matrices work in order to understand
dimensionality of induction so a matrix
is an M by n table objects in our case
those objects are numbers each row and
also each column of a matrix is a vector
matrices of compatible dimensions and
there's a special definition of
compatibility in this context so
matrices of compatible dimensions can be
multiplied together and if you don't
remember this kind of math you should go
and visit some website that explains how
to multiply matrices and then come back
here and try to multiply the two
matrices in the example below so the
next slide I'm going to show you the
answer so the way that matrices are
multiplied is very simple you just
multiply the values in the first row
with the value in the first column and
then you add them up and the result goes
into the cell that corresponds to the
first row and the first column in the
product so the first row of the product
is 1 times 2 plus 2 times 1 plus 4 times
minus 1 or a total of 0
the second row is 2 times 2 plus 5 times
1 plus 7 times minus 1 which is 2 and
finally 4 times 2 plus 9 times 1 plus 14
times minus 1 is equal to 3 so the
product of those two matrices is the
vector is 0 2 3 now another important
concept of linear algebra that is
related to dimensionality of induction
is that of eigenvectors and eigenvalues
so an eigenvector is an implicit
direction for matrix so if we multiply a
vector V which is the eigenvector to the
right-hand side of a matrix a we're
going to obtain the same result as if we
had multiplied V with the lambda which
is a scalar like an eigenvalue in
principle the eigenvalue lambda can be
any complex number but for the examples
that we are going to look at it will
always be a real so to compute the
eigenvalues of a matrix we need to use
the following equation we need to find
the determinant of the matrix a minus
lambda i where i is a unit matrix of the
same size as the matrix a and we want
this to be a square matrix obviously so
that we can compute the determinant and
we want to send set this determinant to
be equal to 0 so let's look at an
example if our matrix is a is minus 1 3
and then 2 0 a minus lambda I is the
matrix shown to the right it's minus 1
minus lambda in the first row 4 by a
three and then two and minus lambda in
the second or so if you want to compute
the determinant of this matrix we need
to find the product of the forward
diagonal and then subtract the value of
the product of the numbers and the
backwards diagonal so that gives us a
minus 1 minus lambda times minus lambda
and then the whole thing minus 3 times 2
equals to 0 if we solve this quadratic
equation which is lambda plus lambda
square minus 6 equals 0 we're going to
see that it has two roots lambda 1
equals 2 and lambda 2 which is equal to
minus 3
so if we pick one of those eigenvalues
and replace them in the equation on the
top we're going to get a new matrix
minus 3 3 2 minus 2 which then has to be
multiplied by the eigenvector x 1 x 2
and we want the result to be equal to 0
well if you solve the system of
equations you will find out that its
answer is x 1 equals x 2 so any
two-dimensional vector where the x and y
coordinates are the same would satisfy
the second equation so if a matrix is
square it can be decomposed into you
lambda u inverse where u is its matrix
of eigenvectors and lambda is a diagonal
matrix of eigenvalues and then you can
do different transformations which are
mathematically equivalent so Sigma U is
equal to u lambda u inverse Sigma u is
equal to lambda and Sigma is equal to u
lambda u inverse so here's an example if
the original matrix s is equal to 2 1 1
2 its two eigenvalues are lambda 1
equals 1 and lambda 2 equals 3 and then
if we do this decomposition we're going
to get that u is equal to the matrix 1 1
minus 1 1 its inverse u minus 1 is equal
to the matrix 1/2 minus 1/2 followed by
1/2 1/2 and you can verify yourselves
that we can indeed recover the original
matrix s by multiplying u with lambda
and then by u inverse you can do this
multiplication in sequence and you will
obtain the original matrix s so what
happened here is that we are now able to
convert the original matrix into a new
space of all the eigenvectors and then
each point in the original space is
going to be represented as a point in
this new representation so in the case
of the weight and height we would have a
new dimension that corresponds to the
age and another dimension that
corresponds to the deviation that the
certain person has given their weight
based on the trend
defined by the age now if the matrix is
not square we have to use a different
technique called singular value
decomposition so why do we care about
non square matrices as well because in
most NLP and information retrieval tasks
we have matrices of either documents and
terms or words and their context
features and those matrices by
definition are not necessarily square so
we can have for example a vocabulary of
size 1 million and a set of 10 million
documents in which case we're going to
have a matrix of 1 million by 10 million
which is clearly not square so in that
case we use another technique called
singular value decomposition in which
case a matrix a is represented as the
product you Sigma V transpose where u is
the matrix of orthogonal eigenvectors of
the product a a transposed V is the
matrix of our terminal icon vectors of a
transpose a and the components of Sigma
are the eigenvalues of a transpose a so
this decomposition exists for all
matrices whether they're dense or sparse
we can estimate the dimensionality of
the different matrices for example if a
has five columns and 3 rows then the
matrix U of the orthogonal eigenvectors
of a a transpose would be a five by five
matrix V the matrix of orthogonal
eigenvectors of a transpose a will have
a dimensionality of three by three now
in MATLAB and octave you can use a very
simple function SVD given the matrix as
input and it will return a tuple
consisting of U s and V where those
match exactly you Sigma and V in our
example let's look at a specific example
we have a collection of seven documents
and nine terms and we can look at what
terms are appear in which document so
for example document 1 contains terms 6
and 9 document 2 contains terms T 1 and
T 2 and so on so we can also look at
this posting list and I will present the
data in the form of a bar
tied craft a bipartite graph has two
components one on the left and one on
the right in this example that
corresponds to different types of
objects so the left hand side or left
hand mode corresponds to the documents
the right hand side corresponds to the
terms so we have for example connection
between D 1 and T 6 and D 1 and T 9 but
we don't have a connection between D 1
and T 7 ok so now let's see how we can
compute the singular value decomposition
of an arbitrary matrix we first are
presented in raw form like the example
on the Left where one means that a
certain term appears in a certain
document and 0 means that it's absent
from that document and then we need to
normalize this matrix by dividing all
the values by the length of the column
vector that they are part of so that
means that in the first column we have
two ones therefore the length of the
vector that corresponds to the first
column is going to be square root of 2
so if we divide each of the values in
that column by square root of 2 we're
going to get 0.71 and 0.71 the second
column vector has three ones therefore
its length is going to be square root of
3 and if we divide one by a square root
of three we're going to get 0.58 and you
can see that this is the technique that
we used to compute all of the other
normalized values so we have to
normalize the matrix before we can
compute its singular value decomposition
so once we do this we can just enter the
matrix in MATLAB or our other favorite
software and run the SVD library and
we're going to get something like this U
is going to be just a 7 so a 9 by 9
matrix V is going to be a 7 by 9 matrix
and then s is going to be 7 by 9 matrix
that corresponds to the spread on the
different axes of the data so the first
dimension here has a spread of 0 of
sorry 1.58 that is the most important
dimension in the lower dimensionality of
presentation
the second value is 1.27 and so on so
those are the singular values that
appear in the Sigma matrix so one thing
that we can do here is we can
reconstitute the original matrix a by
multiplying u by Sigma and V transpose
but we can also produce a different
version of a specifically a star which
is a lower dimensionality version of a
by instead of multiplying u with Sigma
and V transpose we multiply u with Sigma
star and V transpose where Sigma star
only keeps the largest singular values
of the original Sigma matrix so if you
go back to the previous slide we can
essentially delete the fifth and the
sixth line there zero point four five
six nine two in the zero point one nine
seven seven and maybe the zero point
seven one without losing much of the
information stored in this matrix and we
can just keep the four most significant
dimensions that correspond to the four
largest values in Sigma so this is the
rank for approximation of Sigma as you
see it has a few more zeros than the
original matrix and now if we multiply u
with Sigma 4 and V transpose we're going
to get a different representation of a
which is not going to be what we had in
the beginning but it won't be
significantly different from a if we do
this further we can now compute the
representations of the terms and the
documents in the new semantic space and
this is done by appropriate
multiplications of matrices so for
example u times s4 or s4 times V Prime
so this gives us the representations of
the documents and the terms respectively
in the new semantic space now we can
also take this a step further and
compute the rank 2 approximation of the
original matrix by just preserving the
two largest values in the Sigma matrix
and one point five eight and one point
two seven and then if we do the same
operators as before we can compute a new
value for alpha for a sorry which is
it's an act to approximation
so interact to approximation we can now
use you multiply by s2 to get the word
word vector representation in concept
space now there are two concepts and we
can also use as two times V transpose to
find a new concept of presentation of
the documents so in this case we again
have two dimensions and now here's a
slide that summarizes the entire a
singular value decomposition method we
have the documents shown on the top left
and the terms on the top right in this
new semantic space so as you can see
there are two clusters of both documents
and terms I'm going to focus on one of
them in the bottom left area of the
screen you can see that T 3 T 7 appear
near each other and these 677 also
appear near each other so we essentially
killed two birds with one stone first we
found that there's some latent semantic
similarity between the terms T 3 and T 7
and also a similar similarity between
documents d6 and d7 but we also were
able to achieve something that we
couldn't do in the original space and
learn namely to find that document 6 and
7 are similar to terms 3 and 7 in this
new concept space so if you look at the
smallest circle in purple you will see
that d6 is the closest match to T 3 and
T 7 and then the entire cluster of
elements in this quadrant including t37
d6 d7 and t1 are also all semantically
connected and this is actually something
that you can understand better if you
look at the original example and
specific in its graph representation you
can see that d6 which is one of the
documents that appears in the purple
cluster here is represented in fact as T
3 and T 7 d7 is similar to d6 because it
has a lot of common terms with this 6
and then if we continue expanding this
recursion you will see that d2 is the
next most similar document followed by
d4 and so on
this is exactly the intuition that you
would get by looking at the graph
presentation on the right and now for
those who are have more patience there
are a few more formulas in MATLAB that
allow you to see how to translate
individual documents and terms to
concepts you just have to multiply
either an entire column vector or an
entire row vector with a singular value
matrix so now I have a question for you
if a is a document to term matrix what
are a times a transpose and a transpose
times a let's start with a times a
transpose as you can see a times a
transpose is a nine by nine matrix which
is not surprising given that the
original matrix was nine by seven and we
multiply it by its poles which is 7 by
nine and therefore the result should be
nine by nine similarly for a transpose
times a we have a matrix that is a seven
by seven and again this is not
surprising because we multiply the 7 by
nine matrix with the 9 by 7 matrix but
the dimensionalities of those two
products should give you a hint as to
what they mean so it turns out that a
transpose a is the document to document
similarity matrix so for example it
tells you that the similarity between
document 1 and document 2 is 0 whereas
the similarity between document 1 and
document 4 is 0.69 if we go to the
previous slide we can see that we eight
times a transpose is a term to term
similarity matrix so the similarity
between term 1 and term 2 is 0.33 6 for
the similarity between term 2 and term 3
is 0 and so on so this is all based on
the contexts in which those documents
appear and the terms appear so let's now
wrap up this section we discussed a
technique for dimensionality reduction
called latent semantic indexing or LSI
which in some papers is called LSA as a
later semantic analysis this means
pretty much the same thing
so dimensionality reduction is used
to identify hidden or latent concepts in
textual spaces and it is used for
variety of NLP tasks in information
retrieval tasks including but not
limited to query matching in latent
space okay so here now to external
pointers about latent semantic indexing
or if you prefer later semantic analysis
at two of the sites that have been the
most active in this field Colorado and
the University of Tennessee in Knoxville
so this concludes the sections on text
similarity using singular value
decomposition or dimensionality
reduction and the next topic is going to
be on text similarity using text kernels